Field archery involves shooting at targets of varying (and often unmarked) distance, often in woodland and rough terrain. As well as being a sport in its own right, it can be used to improve the techniques and abilities required for bowhunting in a realistic outdoor setting.

Events are usually shot according the rules of either the International Field Archery Association (IFAA)[1] or the World Archery Federation (WA), but sometime to those of national organisations such as the UK's National Field Archery Society (NFAS) and the National Field Archery Association (NFAA) in the USA.

Contents

    1 IFAA/NFAA
    2 WA Field
    3 NFAS (UK)
    4 See also
    5 References

IFAA/NFAA

Three common types of IFAA and NFAA round are the field, hunter, and animal. A round consists of 28 targets in two units of 14.[2][3]

Field rounds are at 'even' distances up to 80 yards (some of the shortest are measured in feet instead), using targets with a black spot with a white inner ring and black outer ring. Four face sizes are used for the various distances. Scoring is five points for the center spot, four for the white inner ring, and three for the outer black ring.

Hunter rounds use 'uneven' distances up to 70 yards (64 m), and although scoring is identical to a field round, the target has an all-black face with a white bullseye. Child and youth positions for these two rounds are closer, no more than 30 and 50 yards (46 m), respectively.

Animal rounds use life-size 2D animal targets with 'uneven' distances reminiscent of the hunter round. The rules and scoring are also significantly different. The archer begins at the first station of the target and shoots his first arrow. If it hits, he does not have to shoot again. If it misses, he advances to station two and shoots a second arrow, then to station three for a third if needed. Scoring areas are vital (20, 16, or 12) and nonvital (18, 14, or 10) with points awarded depending on which arrow scored first. Again, children and youth shoot from reduced range.

3D rounds use life-size models of game animals such as deer. It is most common to see unmarked distances in 3D archery, as the goal is to accurately recreate a hunting environment for competition, albeit a more loosely organized form of competition than other types of field archery. Though the goal is hunting practice, hunting tips (broadheads) are not used, as they would tear up the foam targets too much. Normal target or field tips, of the same weight as the intended broadhead, are used instead.
WA Field
An archer shooting at a 50 metre target during a marked WA 24 round using freestyle recurve

The information in this section is taken from Book 4 of the WA Constitution & Rules.[4]

The World Archery Federation, commonly known as WA and formerly as FITA (Fédération Internationale de Tir à l'Arc), defines a suite of rounds based on a 24-target course.

Four target face sizes are specified: 80 cm; 60 cm; 40 cm and 20 cm. Six target faces of each size are used on the course. For each target face size there are upper and lower distance limits for the various divisions of archer. Target faces have four black outer rings and a yellow spot, each with an equal width. The yellow spot is subdivided into two rings. The black rings score 1 point for the outermost to 4 points for the innermost. A hit in the outer yellow scores 5 points. A hit in the inner yellow scores 6 points. Before April 2008, the innermost yellow ring counted as an X (the number of Xs was used for tie-breaks) but only scored 5 points.

Shooting positions are marked by coloured pegs set at a distance from each target. Generally the red peg is set the furthest from the target, the blue peg is set nearer, and the yellow peg (or white peg in the UK) is set the nearest. The course layer may choose to vary this, though. Each peg is associated with one or more divisions of archer:
Pegs for archer divisions Peg colour 	Division
Red 	Recurve and compound
Blue 	Bare bow, cadet recurve and cadet compound
Yellow 	Cadet bare bow

The UK operates some variations on this for junior archers. When shooting marked distances, the distance to the target is shown on each peg. On unmarked distances, the distance is not shown.

A WA 24 Marked round is shot on a single day using 24 targets at marked distances only. A WA 24 Unmarked round is shot on a single day using 24 targets at unmarked distances only. A WA 24 Mixed round is shot on a single day using 12 targets at marked distances and 12 targets at unmarked distances. A WA Combined Field round consists of a WA 24 Unmarked round shot on one day and a WA 24 Marked round shot on the same course the following day with the distances having been increased.

WA rules state that the lanes between the shooting positions and the targets must not be obstructed by branches or tree trunks.

Archers follow the course in groups of between two and four. The pegs are arranged so that two people can shoot from one peg at the same time. Each archer shoots three arrows at each target, making a round of 72 arrows.
NFAS (UK)

In the United Kingdom the NFAS (National Field Archery Society) sets the rules for many shoots including Big Game and 3D shoots. Most of these consist of 36 or 40 targets or 2x20 targets. The NFAS is not affiliated to any international organisation.

The information in this section is taken from the NFAS Rules of Shooting.[5]

The most common NFAS rounds have a "walk-up" format where the archer starts at the furthest peg from the target and proceeds to nearer pegs if necessary.

The first arrow is shot from the red peg (or sometimes wasp peg for compound). A hit in the kill zone scores 20 points (sometimes 24 if an inner kill zone is being used). A hit in the wound zone (anywhere outside the kill zone but not on antlers or base, or within wound lines on 2D targets) scores 16 points.

If the scoring area is not hit with the first arrow the archer will proceed to the white peg for his/her second shot. A kill scores 14 points. A wound scores 10 points.

If a third shot is needed the archer will proceed to the blue peg. A kill scores 8 points. A wound scores 4 points.

If all 3 arrows miss the scoring zones the archer must stop shooting and a zero is scored for that target.

Juniors 12-14 and 15-16 must shoot blue, yellow, yellow and white, blue, blue respectively.

Cubs (under 12) shoot all their arrows from the closest yellow peg.

All archers attending these shots must carry a valid NFAS card in order to shoot.

There are multiple classes including compound limited, compound unlimited, bowhunter, barebow, freestyle, crossbow, hunting tackle, American flatbow and longbow. The traditional class is also accepted at some shoots.

The information in this section is taken from the NFAS website, sections About the NFAS and NFAS The Rules. [6]

As part of the Constitution of the National Field Archery Society, an annual championship shall be held, open to members.

The NFAS hold shoots throughout the year and all over the country. They currently (2012) hold three championships,[7] open to eligible members.

Scottish Champs - Easter Weekend

3D Championships - Bank Holiday weekend, end of May

National Champs - 3rd weekend in September

To be eligible to shoot a Championships, NFAS members must have competed in three open shoots in the bow style that they wish to shoot, or a previous Championships and existing members must have renewed their membership by the 31st of March.