Good Will Hunting is an 1997 American drama film, directed by Gus Van Sant and starring Matt Damon, Robin Williams, Ben Affleck, Minnie Driver, and Stellan Skarsgård. Written by Affleck and Damon, and with Damon in the title role, the film follows 20-year-old South Boston laborer Will Hunting, an unrecognized genius who, as part of a deferred prosecution agreement after assaulting a police officer, becomes a patient of a therapist (Williams) and studies advanced mathematics with a renowned professor (Skarsgård). Through his therapy sessions, Will re-evaluates his relationships with his best friend (Affleck), his girlfriend (Driver), and himself, facing the significant task of thinking about his future.

The film received universal critical acclaim and was a financial success. It grossed over US$225 million during its theatrical run with only a modest $10 million budget. It was nominated for nine Academy Awards, including the Academy Award for Best Picture, and won two: Best Supporting Actor for Williams and Best Original Screenplay for Damon and Affleck.

In 2014 (upon Williams' death), it was ranked at number 53 in The Hollywood Reporter?'?s 100 Favorite Films list.[1]

Contents

    1 Plot
    2 Cast
    3 Production
        3.1 Development
        3.2 Filming
    4 Reception
        4.1 Box office
        4.2 Critical response
    5 Awards and accolades
        5.1 American Film Institute
    6 Soundtrack
    7 References
    8 External links

Plot
	This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2014)

Twenty-year-old Will Hunting (Damon) of South Boston is a self-taught, genius-level intellect with an eidetic memory, though he works simply as a janitor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and spends his free time drinking with his friends Chuckie (Affleck), Billy (Cole Hauser) and Morgan (Casey Affleck). When Professor Gerald Lambeau (Skarsgård) posts a difficult problem taken from algebraic graph theory as a challenge for his graduate students, Will solves the problem anonymously, stunning both the graduate students and Lambeau himself. As a challenge to the unknown genius, Lambeau posts an even more difficult problem and chances upon Will solving it. Fearing he will lose his sole means of (a meager) income, Will flees and skips going into work the next day. That night, Will meets Skylar (Driver), a British orphan about to graduate from Harvard, who plans on attending medical school at Stanford.

Assaulting both a man who bullied him as a child and a police officer who attempts to break up the fight, Will faces incarceration, but Lambeau arranges for him to forgo jail time if he agrees to study mathematics under Lambeau's supervision while simultaneously seeking psychotherapy. Will tentatively agrees but treats his first few therapists with contempt; his refusal to open up is met with staunch defiance by the bourgeois mentality of the therapists, who each refuse to treat Will further. In desperation, Lambeau calls on Dr. Sean Maguire (Williams), his estranged—and much more grounded—college roommate, who now teaches psychology at Bunker Hill Community College. Unlike the other therapists, Sean actually challenges Will's weak defense mechanisms, and after a few unproductive sessions Will begins to open up.

Will is particularly struck by Sean's story of how he met his wife by giving up his ticket to the historic sixth game of the 1975 World Series after falling in love at first sight. Sean neither regrets his decision, nor does he regret the final years of his marriage when his wife was dying of cancer. This encourages Will to build a relationship with Skylar, though he lies to her about his past and is reluctant to introduce her to his friends or show her his rundown neighborhood. Will also challenges Sean to take an objective look at his own life, since Sean has been unable to move on from his wife's death.

Chafing under Lambeau's high expectations, Will makes a mockery of job interviews that Lambeau arranges for him. When Skylar asks Will to move to California with her, he panics and pushes her away, revealing that he is an orphan and that his foster father physically abused him. Skylar tells Will that she loves him, but he denies loving her and then leaves. He next storms out on Lambeau, dismissing the mathematical research he has been doing. Sean points out that Will is so adept at anticipating future failure in his interpersonal relationships that he deliberately sabotages them in order to avoid emotional pain. When Will refuses to give an honest reply about what he wants to do with his life, Sean shows him the door. Will tells Chuckie he wants to be a laborer for the rest of his life; Chuckie responds that it would be an insult to his friends for Will to waste his potential and that his fondest wish is that Will should leave to pursue something greater.

Will walks in on a heated argument between Sean and Lambeau over his future. Sean and Will share that they were both victims of child abuse. Sean helps Will to see that he is a victim of his own inner demons and to accept that it is not his fault. Will decides to accept one of the job offers arranged by Lambeau. Having helped Will overcome his problems, Sean reconciles with Lambeau and decides to take a sabbatical to travel the world. When Will's friends present him with a rebuilt Chevrolet Nova for his twenty-first birthday, he decides to pass on his job offers and drive to California to reunite with Skylar. Sometime later, Chuckie goes to Will's house to pick him up, only to find that he is not there. Sean comes out of his house and finds a letter from Will in his mailbox, which tells him he is going to see Skylar, much to his pleasure. In the final scene, Will drives away into the sunset.
Cast

    Matt Damon as William "Will" Hunting
    Robin Williams as Sean Maguire
    Ben Affleck as Chuck "Chuckie" Sullivan
    Stellan Skarsgård as Professor Gerald Lambeau
    Minnie Driver as Skylar
    Casey Affleck as Morgan O'Mally
    Cole Hauser as William "Billy" McBride
    John Mighton as Tom
    George Plimpton as Dr. Henry Lipkin

Production
Development

Originally, Matt Damon and Ben Affleck wrote the screenplay as a thriller about a young man in the rough-and-tumble streets of South Boston who possesses a superior intelligence and is targeted by the FBI to become a G-Man. Castle Rock Entertainment president Rob Reiner later urged them to drop the thriller aspect of the story and to focus on the relationship between Will Hunting (Damon) and his psychologist (Williams). At Reiner's request, screenwriter William Goldman read the script and further suggested that the film's climax ought to be Will's decision to follow his girlfriend Skylar to California. Goldman has consistently denied the persistent rumor that he wrote Good Will Hunting or acted as a script doctor.[2] In his book Which Lie Did I Tell?, Goldman jokingly writes, "I did not just doctor it. I wrote the whole thing from scratch."[3] before dismissing the rumour as false.

Castle Rock bought the script for $675,000 against $775,000, meaning that Damon and Affleck would stand to earn an additional $100,000 if the film was produced and they retained sole writing credit. However, studios balked at the idea of Affleck and Damon in the lead roles, with many studio executives stating that they wanted Brad Pitt and Leonardo DiCaprio. At the time Damon and Affleck were meeting at Castle Rock, Kevin Smith was working with Affleck on Mallrats and with both Damon and Affleck on Chasing Amy.[4] Seeing that Damon and Affleck were having trouble with Castle Rock, Smith and his producer partner Scott Mosier brought the script to Miramax, which eventually resulted in the two receiving co-executive producer credits for Hunting. The script was put into turnaround and Miramax bought the rights from Castle Rock.

After buying the rights from Castle Rock, Miramax gave the green light to put the film into production. Several well-known filmmakers were originally considered to direct, including Mel Gibson, Michael Mann, and Steven Soderbergh. Originally, Affleck asked Smith if he was interested in directing. He declined, saying they needed a "good director" and that he only directs things he writes and is not much of a visual director. Damon and Affleck later chose Gus Van Sant for the job, whose work on previous films like Drugstore Cowboy (1989) had left a favorable impression on the fledgling screenwriters. Miramax was persuaded and hired Van Sant to direct the film.
Filming
"How'd you like them apples?" The Baskin-Robbins / Dunkin' Donuts, in front of which Will mocked Harvard student Clark

The film was filmed on location in the Greater Boston area and Toronto between April and June 1997. Although the story is set in Boston, much of the film was shot at locations in Canada, with the University of Toronto standing in for the interiors of MIT and Harvard University. The classroom scenes were filmed at McLennan Physical Laboratories (of the University of Toronto) and Central Technical School. Harvard normally disallows filming on its property, but permitted limited filming by the project after intervention by Harvard alumnus John Lithgow.[5][clarification needed] Likewise, only the exterior shots of Bunker Hill Community College were filmed in Boston; however, Sean's office was built in Toronto as an exact replica of one at the college.[6]

The restaurant to which Lambeau took Sean was Locke-Ober on Winter Place. In 2012, it closed for business.[7]
The Au Bon Pain where Will explained his photographic memory to Skylar

The interior bar scenes set in "Southie" were shot on location at Woody's L St. Tavern.[8] Meanwhile, the homes of Will (190 West 6th Street) and Sean (261 E Street), while some distance apart in the movie, actually back up to each other on Bowen Street, the narrow street Chuckie drives down on a couple of occasions to walk up to Will's back door.[9][10]

The Bow and Arrow Pub, which was located at the corner of Bow Street and Massachusetts Avenue in Cambridge, doubled as the Harvard bar in which Will met Skylar for the first time. The Baskin-Robbins/Dunkin' Donuts featured in the "How'd you like them apples?" scene was next door to the pub (now Grafton Street) at the time of the film's release, but it later moved two doors down, after One Bow Street opened up between the two the following year.[10][11][12] The Dunkin Donuts has since moved once again a short distance east, to the corner of Massachusetts Ave and Ellery Street. However, there is no longer an affiliated Baskin-Robbins.

The Tasty, which is the present-day Citizens Bank at the corner of JFK and Brattle Streets, was the scene of Will and Skylar's first kiss.[13] The Au Bon Pain, where Will and Skylar discuss the former's photographic memory, is at the corner of Dunster Street and Mass Ave.[14] Cups of Will's caffeine of choice, Peet's Coffee, are visible on several tables because the product was served at Au Bon Pain locations at the time.

The Boston Public Garden bench on which Will and Sean sat for a scene in the film became a temporary shrine upon Robin Williams' death on August 11, 2014.[15]

The footage during the closing credits is along the Massachusetts Turnpike in Stockbridge, heading west toward the New York border.

The cast engaged in considerable improvisation in rehearsals. Robin Williams, Ben Affleck and Minnie Driver each made significant contributions to their characters. Robin Williams' last line in the film, as well as the therapy scene in which he talks about his character's wife's little idiosyncrasies, were both ad-libbed and took everyone by surprise. According to Damon's commentary in the DVD version of the film, this caused the cameraman to laugh so hard that the camera can be seen moving up and down slightly.

Director Gus Van Sant says in the DVD commentary that, had he known just how successful the film was going to be, he would have left at least a couple of edited scenes intact that were cut purely for considerations of length. One of these involves Skylar's visit to Chuckie in hopes of shedding light on some of Will's eccentricities that Will himself is unwilling to discuss.

The film is dedicated to the memory of poet Allen Ginsberg and writer William S. Burroughs, both of whom died in 1997.
Reception
Box office

In the film's opening weekend in limited release, it earned $272,912. In its January 1998 wide-release opening weekend, it earned $10,261,471. It went on to gross $138,433,435 in North America for a total worldwide gross of $225,900,000.
Critical response

The film received universal acclaim and positive reviews from critics. Review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes gives the film a score of 97% based on review from 69 critics, with an average score of 8/10, making the film a "Certified Fresh" on the website's rating system.[16] At Metacritic, which assigns a weighted mean rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics, the film received an average score of 70, based on 28 reviews, which indicates "Generally favorable reviews".[17]

Roger Ebert gave the film three out of four stars, writing that while the story is "predictable", it is "the individual moments, not the payoff, that make it so effective."[18]

Several scholars have examined the film as a portrayal of residual Catholic–Protestant tensions in Boston, as Irish Catholics from Southie are aligned against ostensibly Protestant characters who are affiliated with Harvard and MIT.[19][20]
Awards and accolades

70th Academy Awards

    Won: Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor – Robin Williams
    Won: Academy Award for Best Writing (Original Screenplay) – Ben Affleck & Matt Damon
    Nominated: Academy Award for Best Picture
    Nominated: Academy Award for Best Director – Gus Van Sant
    Nominated: Academy Award for Best Actor – Matt Damon
    Nominated: Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress – Minnie Driver
    Nominated: Academy Award for Film Editing – Pietro Scalia
    Nominated: Academy Award for Original Music Score – Danny Elfman
    Nominated: Academy Award for Best Song – Elliott Smith (song "Miss Misery")

55th Golden Globe Awards

    Won: Golden Globe Award for Best Screenplay – Ben Affleck & Matt Damon
    Nominated: Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture – Drama
    Nominated: Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Drama – Matt Damon
    Nominated: Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor – Motion Picture – Robin Williams

Other Major Awards / Nominations

    Won: Silver Bear for Outstanding Single Achievement – Matt Damon[21]
    Nominated: Directors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Directorial Achievement in Motion Pictures – Gus Van Sant
    Nominated: Writers Guild of America Award for Best Screenplay Written Directly for the Screen – Ben Affleck & Matt Damon

American Film Institute

    AFI's 100 Years... 100 Songs:
        Miss Misery – Nominated
    AFI's 100 Years... 100 Cheers – Nominated
    AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) – Nominated

Soundtrack

The musical score for Good Will Hunting was composed by Danny Elfman, who had previously collaborated with Gus Van Sant on To Die For and would go on to score many of the director's other films. The film also features many songs written and recorded by singer-songwriter Elliott Smith. His song "Miss Misery" was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Original Song, but lost to "My Heart Will Go On" from Titanic. Elfman's score was also nominated for an Oscar, but lost to Titanic as well. On September 11, 2006, NBC's The Today Show used Elfman's song "Weepy Donuts" while Matt Lauer spoke during the opening credits.
Good Will Hunting: Music from the Miramax Motion Picture[22]
Soundtrack album by Various artists
Released 	December 2, 1997
Genre 	Soundtrack, indie rock, acoustic rock, indie folk
Label 	Capitol

A soundtrack album for the film was released by Capitol Records on November 18, 1997, though only two of Elfman's cues appear on the release.[23]

    Elliott Smith – "Between the Bars" (Orchestral)
    Jeb Loy Nichols – "As the Rain"
    Elliott Smith – "Angeles"
    Elliott Smith – "No Name #3"
    The Waterboys – "Fisherman's Blues"
    Luscious Jackson – "Why Do I Lie?"
    Danny Elfman – "Will Hunting" (Main Titles)
    Elliott Smith – "Between the Bars"
    Elliott Smith – "Say Yes"
    Gerry Rafferty – "Baker Street"
    Andru Donalds – "Somebody's Baby"
    The Dandy Warhols – "Boys Better"
    Al Green – "How Can You Mend a Broken Heart?"
    Elliott Smith – "Miss Misery"
    Danny Elfman – "Weepy Donuts"

"Afternoon Delight" by the Starland Vocal Band was featured in the film, but did not appear on the soundtrack album.
Good Will Hunting: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack
Soundtrack album by Danny Elfman, Elliott Smith
Released 	March 3, 2014
Genre 	Soundtrack
Label 	Music Box Records

A limited edition soundtrack album featuring Elfman's complete score from the film was released by Music Box Records on March 3, 2014. The soundtrack, issued in 1500 copies, includes all of Elfman's cues (including music not featured on the rare Miramax Academy promo) and also contains the songs by Elliott Smith. One of the tracks is Smith's songs with Elfman's arrangements added into the mix.[24]

    Main Title (2:44)
    Genie Mopper (0:37)
    First Calculation (1:08)
    Theorem (0:42)
    Kick Ass Choir (0:59)
    Mystery Math (2:28)
    Them Apples (0:57)
    Jail (1:13)
    Second Shrink (1:14)
    Any Port (1:25)
    Times Up (1:14)
    Oliver Twist (1:58)
    Staring Contest (0:49)
    Secret Weapon (0:57)
    Retainer (Part A) (0:58)
    Retainer (Part B) (0:20)
    Tell You Something (0:48)
    No Love Me (0:47)
    Fire Music (1:11)
    Whose Fault (2:34)
    End Titles (3:50)
    Between the Bars (Orchestral) (1:09) - Performed by Elliott Smith / Arr. by Elfman
    No Name #3 (3:04) - Performed by Elliott Smith
    Say Yes (2:15) - Performed by Elliott Smith
    Between the Bars (2:21) - Performed by Elliott Smith
    Angeles (2:55) - Performed by Elliott Smith
    Miss Misery (3:12) - Performed by Elliott Smith
